8
Scheduling:
The Multi-Level Feedback Queue
In this chapter, we’ll tackle the problem of developing one of the mos t
well-known approaches to scheduling, known as the Multi-level Feed-
back Queue (MLFQ) . The Multi-level Feedback Queue (MLFQ) sched-
uler was ﬁrst described by Corbato et al. in 1962 [C+62] in a sys tem
known as the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS), and this work,
along with later work on Multics, led the ACM to award Corbato its
highest honor, the T uring Award. The scheduler has subsequently been
reﬁned throughout the years to the implementations you will encou nter
in some modern systems.
The fundamental problem MLFQ tries to address is two-fold. Firs t, it
would like to optimize turnaround time, which, as we saw in the previous
note, is done by running shorter jobs ﬁrst; unfortunately , the OS d oesn’t
generally know how long a job will run for, exactly the knowledge tha t
algorithms like SJF (or STCF) require. Second, MLFQ would like to mak e
a system feel responsive to interactive users (i.e., users si tting and staring
at the screen, waiting for a process to ﬁnish), and thus minimiz e response
time; unfortunately , algorithms like Round Robin reduce response tim e
but are terrible for turnaround time. Thus, our problem: given th at we
in general do not know anything about a process, how can we build a
scheduler to achieve these goals? How can the scheduler learn, as the
system runs, the characteristics of the jobs it is running, and thus make
better scheduling decisions?
THE CRUX :
HOW TO SCHEDULE WITHOUT PERFECT KNOWLEDGE ?
How can we design a scheduler that both minimizes response time f or
interactive jobs while also minimizing turnaround time withou t a priori
knowledge of job length?
1

2
SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE
TIP : L EARN FROM HISTORY
The multi-level feedback queue is an excellent example of a sy stem that
learns from the past to predict the future. Such approaches are c om-
mon in operating systems (and many other places in Computer Scienc e,
including hardware branch predictors and caching algorithms ). Such
approaches work when jobs have phases of behavior and are thus pre-
dictable; of course, one must be careful with such techniques, a s they can
easily be wrong and drive a system to make worse decisions than th ey
would have with no knowledge at all.
8.1 MLFQ: Basic Rules
To build such a scheduler, in this chapter we will describe th e basic
algorithms behind a multi-level feedback queue; although the speciﬁcs of
many implemented MLFQs differ [E95], most approaches are simi lar.
In our treatment, the MLFQ has a number of distinct queues, each
assigned a different priority level. At any given time, a job that is ready
to run is on a single queue. MLFQ uses priorities to decide which job
should run at a given time: a job with higher priority (i.e., a job on a
higher queue) is chosen to run.
Of course, more than one job may be on a given queue, and thus have
the same priority . In this case, we will just use round-robin scheduling
among those jobs.
Thus, we arrive at the ﬁrst two basic rules for MLFQ:
• Rule 1: If Priority(A) > Priority(B), A runs (B doesn’t).
• Rule 2: If Priority(A) = Priority(B), A & B run in RR.
The key to MLFQ scheduling therefore lies in how the scheduler s ets
priorities. Rather than giving a ﬁxed priority to each job, MLFQ varies
the priority of a job based on its observed behavior . If, for example, a job
repeatedly relinquishes the CPU while waiting for input from t he key-
board, MLFQ will keep its priority high, as this is how an interac tive
process might behave. If, instead, a job uses the CPU intensive ly for long
periods of time, MLFQ will reduce its priority . In this way , MLFQwill try
to learn about processes as they run, and thus use the history of the job to
predict its future behavior.
If we were to put forth a picture of what the queues might look like at a
given instant, we might see something like the following (Figure 8.1, page
3). In the ﬁgure, two jobs (A and B) are at the highest priority le vel, while
job C is in the middle and Job D is at the lowest priority . Given our current
knowledge of how MLFQ works, the scheduler would just alternate ti me
slices between A and B because they are the highest priority job s in the
system; poor jobs C and D would never even get to run — an outrage!
Of course, just showing a static snapshot of some queues does not re-
ally give you an idea of how MLFQ works. What we need is to under-
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE 3
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
[Low Priority]
[High Priority]
D
C
A B
Figure 8.1: MLFQ Example
stand how job priority changes over time. And that, in a surprise only
to those who are reading a chapter from this book for the ﬁrst time, i s
exactly what we will do next.
8.2 Attempt #1: How To Change Priority
We now must decide how MLFQ is going to change the priority level
of a job (and thus which queue it is on) over the lifetime of a job. To do
this, we must keep in mind our workload: a mix of interactive jobs th at
are short-running (and may frequently relinquish the CPU), a nd some
longer-running “CPU-bound” jobs that need a lot of CPU time but whe re
response time isn’t important.
For this, we need a new concept, which we will call the job’s allotment.
The allotment is the amount of time a job can spend at a given priorit y
level before the scheduler reduces its priority . For simplicit y , at ﬁrst, we
will assume the allotment is equal to a single time slice.
Here is our ﬁrst attempt at a priority-adjustment algorithm:
• Rule 3: When a job enters the system, it is placed at the highest
priority (the topmost queue).
• Rule 4a: If a job uses up its allotment while running, its priority is
reduced (i.e., it moves down one queue).
• Rule 4b: If a job gives up the CPU (for example, by performing
an I/O operation) before the allotment is up, it stays at the same
priority level (i.e., its allotment is reset).
© 2008–23, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

4
SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE
Q2
Q1
Q0
0 50 100 150 200
Figure 8.2: Long-running Job Over Time
Example 1: A Single Long-Running Job
Let’s look at some examples. First, we’ll look at what happens when th ere
has been a long running job in the system, with a time slice of 10 ms (and
with the allotment set equal to the time slice). Figure 8.2 show s what
happens to this job over time in a three-queue scheduler.
As you can see in the example, the job enters at the highest priori ty
(Q2). After a single time slice of 10 ms, the scheduler reduces the job’s
priority by one, and thus the job is on Q1. After running at Q1 for a ti me
slice, the job is ﬁnally lowered to the lowest priority in the syst em (Q0),
where it remains. Pretty simple, no?
Example 2: Along Came A Short Job
Now let’s look at a more complicated example, and hopefully see how
MLFQ tries to approximate SJF. In this example, there are two job s: A,
which is a long-running CPU-intensive job, and B, which is a short-running
interactive job. Assume A has been running for some time, and the n B ar-
rives. What will happen? Will MLFQ approximate SJF for B?
Figure 8.3 on page 5 (left) plots the results of this scenario. Job A
(shown in black) is running along in the lowest-priority queue (a s would
any long-running CPU-intensive jobs); B (shown in gray) arrive s at time
T = 100 , and thus is inserted into the highest queue; as its run-time is
short (only 20 ms), B completes before reaching the bottom queue, in two
time slices; then A resumes running (at low priority).
From this example, you can hopefully understand one of the major
goals of the algorithm: because it doesn’t know whether a job will be a
short job or a long-running job, it ﬁrst assumes it might be a short job, thus
giving the job high priority . If it actually is a short job, it will run quickly
and complete; if it is not a short job, it will slowly move down the queu es,
and thus soon prove itself to be a long-running more batch-like proc ess.
In this manner, MLFQ approximates SJF.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE 5
Q0
Q1
Q2
0 50 100 150 200
Q0
Q1
Q2
0 50 100 150 200
Figure 8.3: Along Came An Interactive Job: Two Examples
Example 3: What About I/O?
Let’s now look at an example with some I/O. As Rule 4b states above, if a
process gives up the processor before using up its allotment, we ke ep it at
the same priority level. The intent of this rule is simple: if an interactive
job, for example, is doing a lot of I/O (say by waiting for user input f rom
the keyboard or mouse), it will relinquish the CPU before its allot ment is
complete; in such case, we don’t wish to penalize the job and thus s imply
keep it at the same level.
Figure 8.3 (right) shows an example of how this works, with an in-
teractive job B (shown in gray) that needs the CPU only for 1 ms befor e
performing an I/O competing for the CPU with a long-running batch job
A (shown in black). The MLFQ approach keeps B at the highest prior -
ity because B keeps releasing the CPU; if B is an interactive j ob, MLFQ
further achieves its goal of running interactive jobs quickly .
Problems With Our Current MLFQ
We thus have a basic MLFQ. It seems to do a fairly good job, sharing the
CPU fairly between long-running jobs, and letting short or I/O-i ntensive
interactive jobs run quickly . Unfortunately , the approach we have devel-
oped thus far contains serious ﬂaws. Can you think of any?
(This is where you pause and think as deviously as you can)
First, there is the problem of starvation: if there are “too many” in-
teractive jobs in the system, they will combine to consume all CPU time,
and thus long-running jobs will never receive any CPU time (they starve).
We’d like to make some progress on these jobs even in this scenario.
Second, a smart user could rewrite their program to game the sched-
uler. Gaming the scheduler generally refers to the idea of doing some -
thing sneaky to trick the scheduler into giving you more than you r fair
share of the resource. The algorithm we have described is suscep tible to
© 2008–23, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

6
SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE
TIP : S CHEDULING MUST BE SECURE FROM ATTACK
You might think that a scheduling policy , whether inside the OS itself
(as discussed herein), or in a broader context (e.g., in a distri buted stor-
age system’s I/O request handling [Y+18]), is not a security concern, but
in increasingly many cases, it is exactly that. Consider the m odern dat-
acenter, in which users from around the world share CPUs, memorie s,
networks, and storage systems; without care in policy design and en-
forcement, a single user may be able to adversely harm others an d gain
advantage for itself. Thus, scheduling policy forms an importan t part of
the security of a system, and should be carefully constructed.
the following attack: before the allotment is used, issue an I/O op eration
(e.g., to a ﬁle) and thus relinquish the CPU; doing so allows you t o remain
in the same queue, and thus gain a higher percentage of CPU time . When
done right (e.g., by running for 99% of the allotment before relinq uishing
the CPU), a job could nearly monopolize the CPU.
Finally , a program may change its behavior over time; what was CPU-
bound may transition to a phase of interactivity . With our curren t ap-
proach, such a job would be out of luck and not be treated like the other
interactive jobs in the system.
8.3 Attempt #2: The Priority Boost
Let’s try to change the rules and see if we can avoid the problem of
starvation. What could we do in order to guarantee that CPU-bound jobs
will make some progress (even if it is not much?).
The simple idea here is to periodically boost the priority of all the jobs
in the system. There are many ways to achieve this, but let’s ju st do some-
thing simple: throw them all in the topmost queue; hence, a new ru le:
• Rule 5: After some time period S, move all the jobs in the system
to the topmost queue.
Our new rule solves two problems at once. First, processes are gua r-
anteed not to starve: by sitting in the top queue, a job will share the CPU
with other high-priority jobs in a round-robin fashion, and thus ev entu-
ally receive service. Second, if a CPU-bound job has become intera ctive,
the scheduler treats it properly once it has received the priori ty boost.
Let’s see an example. In this scenario, we just show the behavior of
a long-running job when competing for the CPU with two short-runni ng
interactive jobs. Two graphs are shown in Figure 8.4 (page 7). O n the left,
there is no priority boost, and thus the long-running job gets star ved once
the two short jobs arrive; on the right, there is a priority boost eve ry 100
ms (which is likely too small of a value, but used here for the exam ple),
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE 7
Q2
Q1
Q0
0 50 100 150 200
Q2
Q1
Q0
0 50 100 150 200
Figure 8.4: Without (Left) and With (Right) Priority Boost
and thus we at least guarantee that the long-running job will ma ke some
progress, getting boosted to the highest priority every 100 ms an d thus
getting to run periodically .
Of course, the addition of the time period S leads to the obvious ques-
tion: what should S be set to? John Ousterhout, a well-regarded systems
researcher [O11], used to call such values in systems voo-doo constants,
because they seemed to require some form of black magic to set the m cor-
rectly . Unfortunately ,S has that ﬂavor. If it is set too high, long-running
jobs could starve; too low, and interactive jobs may not get a proper s hare
of the CPU. As such, it is often left to the system administrator t o ﬁnd the
right value – or in the modern world, increasingly , to automatic m ethods
based on machine learning [A+17].
8.4 Attempt #3: Better Accounting
We now have one more problem to solve: how to prevent gaming of
our scheduler? The real culprit here, as you might have guessed , are
Rules 4a and 4b, which let a job retain its priority by relinquis hing the
CPU before its allotment expires. So what should we do?
TIP : A VOID VOO-DOO CONSTANTS (O USTERHOUT ’S LAW)
Avoiding voo-doo constants is a good idea whenever possible. Unfor-
tunately , as in the example above, it is often difﬁcult. One coul d try to
make the system learn a good value, but that too is not straightforw ard.
The frequent result: a conﬁguration ﬁle ﬁlled with default par ameter val-
ues that a seasoned administrator can tweak when something isn’t quite
working correctly . As you can imagine, these are often left unmodi ﬁed,
and thus we are left to hope that the defaults work well in the ﬁel d. This
tip brought to you by our old OS professor, John Ousterhout, and hence
we call it Ousterhout’s Law.
© 2008–23, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

8
SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE
Q0
Q1
Q2
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Q0
Q1
Q2
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Figure 8.5: Without (Left) and With (Right) Gaming T olerance
The solution here is to perform better accounting of CPU time at each
level of the MLFQ. Instead of forgetting how much of its allotment a p ro-
cess used at a given level when it performs I/O, the scheduler s hould
keep track; once a process has used its allotment, it is demoted to the next
priority queue. Whether it uses its allotment in one long burst or m any
small ones should not matter. We thus rewrite Rules 4a and 4b to th e
following single rule:
• Rule 4: Once a job uses up its time allotment at a given level (re-
gardless of how many times it has given up the CPU), its priority i s
reduced (i.e., it moves down one queue).
Let’s look at an example. Figure 8.5 shows what happens when a
workload tries to game the scheduler with the old Rules 4a and 4b ( on
the left) as well the new anti-gaming Rule 4. Without any protec tion from
gaming, a process can issue an I/O before its allotment ends, thu s stay-
ing at the same priority level, and dominating CPU time. With be tter
accounting in place (right), regardless of the I/O behavior of th e process,
it slowly moves down the queues, and thus cannot gain an unfair sha re
of the CPU.
8.5 Tuning MLFQ And Other Issues
A few other issues arise with MLFQ scheduling. One big question is
how to parameterize such a scheduler. For example, how many queues
should there be? How big should the time slice be per queue? The al -
lotment? How often should priority be boosted in order to avoid star-
vation and account for changes in behavior? There are no easy answ ers
to these questions, and thus only some experience with workloads a nd
subsequent tuning of the scheduler will lead to a satisfactory balance.
For example, most MLFQ variants allow for varying time-slice len gth
across different queues. The high-priority queues are usuall y given short
time slices; they are comprised of interactive jobs, after all, and thus
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE 9
Q2
Q1
Q0
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Figure 8.6: Lower Priority, Longer Quanta
quickly alternating between them makes sense (e.g., 10 or few er millisec-
onds). The low-priority queues, in contrast, contain long-runnin g jobs
that are CPU-bound; hence, longer time slices work well (e.g., 1 00s of
ms). Figure 8.6 shows an example in which two jobs run for 20 ms at t he
highest queue (with a 10-ms time slice), 40 ms in the middle (2 0-ms time
slice), and with a 40-ms time slice at the lowest.
The Solaris MLFQ implementation — the Time-Sharing scheduling
class, or TS — is particularly easy to conﬁgure; it provides a set of tables
that determine exactly how the priority of a process is altered th rough-
out its lifetime, how long each time slice is, and how often to boost th e
priority of a job [AD00]; an administrator can muck with this tabl e in or-
der to make the scheduler behave in different ways. Default v alues for
the table are 60 queues, with slowly increasing time-slice le ngths from
20 milliseconds (highest priority) to a few hundred millisecon ds (lowest),
and priorities boosted around every 1 second or so.
Other MLFQ schedulers don’t use a table or the exact rules descri bed
in this chapter; rather they adjust priorities using mathema tical formu-
lae. For example, the FreeBSD scheduler (version 4.3) uses a form ula to
calculate the current priority level of a job, basing it on how much CPU
the process has used [LM+89]; in addition, usage is decayed over time,
providing the desired priority boost in a different manner than d escribed
herein. See Epema’s paper for an excellent overview of such decay-usage
algorithms and their properties [E95].
Finally , many schedulers have a few other features that you mig ht en-
counter. For example, some schedulers reserve the highest prior ity levels
for operating system work; thus typical user jobs can never obtain the
highest levels of priority in the system. Some systems also allow s ome
user advice to help set priorities; for example, by using the command-line
utility nice you can increase or decrease the priority of a job (somewhat)
and thus increase or decrease its chances of running at any give n time.
See the man page for more.
© 2008–23, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

10
SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE
TIP : U SE ADVICE WHERE POSSIBLE
As the operating system rarely knows what is best for each and eve ry
process of the system, it is often useful to provide interfaces to allow users
or administrators to provide some hints to the OS. We often call such
hints advice, as the OS need not necessarily pay attention to it, but rather
might take the advice into account in order to make a better deci sion.
Such hints are useful in many parts of the OS, including the sched uler
(e.g., with nice), memory manager (e.g., madvise), and ﬁle system (e.g.,
informed prefetching and caching [P+95]).
8.6 MLFQ: Summary
We have described a scheduling approach known as the Multi-Lev el
Feedback Queue (MLFQ). Hopefully you can now see why it is called
that: it has multiple levels of queues, and uses feedback to determine the
priority of a given job. History is its guide: pay attention to how job s
behave over time and treat them accordingly .
The reﬁned set of MLFQ rules, spread throughout the chapter, are re-
produced here for your viewing pleasure:
• Rule 1: If Priority(A) > Priority(B), A runs (B doesn’t).
• Rule 2: If Priority(A) = Priority(B), A & B run in round-robin fash-
ion using the time slice (quantum length) of the given queue.
• Rule 3: When a job enters the system, it is placed at the highest
priority (the topmost queue).
• Rule 4: Once a job uses up its time allotment at a given level (re-
gardless of how many times it has given up the CPU), its priority i s
reduced (i.e., it moves down one queue).
• Rule 5: After some time period S, move all the jobs in the system
to the topmost queue.
MLFQ is interesting for the following reason: instead of demandin g
a priori knowledge of the nature of a job, it observes the execution of a
job and prioritizes it accordingly . In this way , it manages to ac hieve the
best of both worlds: it can deliver excellent overall performance (similar
to SJF/STCF) for short-running interactive jobs, and is fair and m akes
progress for long-running CPU-intensive workloads. For this reas on,
many systems, including BSD U NIX derivatives [LM+89, B86], Solaris
[M06], and Windows NT and subsequent Windows operating systems
[CS97] use a form of MLFQ as their base scheduler.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE 11
References
[A+17] “Automatic Database Management System Tuning Through Large-scale Machine Learn-
ing” by Dana Van Aken, Andrew Pavlo, Geoffrey J. Gordon, Bohan Zhang. SIGMOD ’17. This
isn’t about the application of machine learning to CPU scheduling in the OS , but rather a cool early
example of automatically tuning parameters of a database via ML techniques. Worth a read, if you like
ML... which, alas, everyone seems to these days.
[AD00] “Multilevel Feedback Queue Scheduling in Solaris” by Andrea A rpaci-Dusseau. Avail-
able: http://www.ostep.org/Citations/notes-solaris.pdf. A great short set of notes by one of the
authors on the details of the Solaris scheduler. OK, we are probably biased in th is description, but the
notes are pretty darn good.
[B86] “The Design of the U NIX Operating System” by M.J. Bach. Prentice-Hall, 1986. One of the
classic old books on how a real UNIX operating system is built; a deﬁnite must-read for kernel hackers.
[C+62] “An Experimental Time-Sharing System” by F. J. Corbato, M. M. D aggett, R. C. Daley .
IFIPS 1962. A bit hard to read, but the source of many of the ﬁrst ideas in multi-level fee dback schedul-
ing. Much of this later went into Multics, which one could argue was the most inﬂuential operating
system of all time.
[CS97] “Inside Windows NT” by Helen Custer and David A. Solomon. Micro soft Press, 1997.
The NT book, if you want to learn about something other than UNIX . Of course, why would you? OK,
we’re kidding; you might actually work for Microsoft some day you know.
[E95] “An Analysis of Decay-Usage Scheduling in Multiprocessors” by D .H.J. Epema. SIG-
METRICS ’95. A nice paper on the state of the art of scheduling back in the mid 1990s, inclu ding a
good overview of the basic approach behind decay-usage schedulers.
[LM+89] “The Design and Implementation of the 4.3BSD U NIX Operating System” by S.J. Lef-
ﬂer, M.K. McKusick, M.J. Karels, J.S. Quarterman. Addison-Wesley , 1989 . Another OS classic,
written by four of the main people behind BSD. The later versions of this book, w hile more up to date,
don’t quite match the beauty of this one.
[M06] “Solaris Internals: Solaris 10 and OpenSolaris Kernel Architectu re” by Richard Mc-
Dougall. Prentice-Hall, 2006. A good book about Solaris and how it works.
[O11] “John Ousterhout’s Home Page” by John Ousterhout. www.stanford.edu/˜ouster/.
The home page of the famous Professor Ousterhout. The two co-authors of this book had the pleasure of
taking graduate operating systems from Ousterhout while in graduate school; ind eed, this is where the
two co-authors got to know each other, eventually leading to marriage, kids, and even this book. Thus,
you really can blame Ousterhout for this entire mess you’re in.
[P+95] “Informed Prefetching and Caching” by R.H. Patterson, G.A. Gibson, E. G inting, D.
Stodolsky , J. Zelenka. SOSP ’95, Copper Mountain, Colorado, October 1995. A fun paper about
some very cool ideas in ﬁle systems, including how applications can give th e OS advice about what ﬁles
it is accessing and how it plans to access them.
[Y+18] “Principled Schedulability Analysis for Distributed Storag e Systems using Thread Ar-
chitecture Models” by Suli Yang, Jing Liu, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Re mzi H. Arpaci-
Dusseau. OSDI ’18, San Diego, California. A recent work of our group that demonstrates the
difﬁculty of scheduling I/O requests within modern distributed storage systems such as Hive/HDFS,
Cassandra, MongoDB, and Riak. Without care, a single user might be able to mon opolize system re-
sources.
© 2008–23, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

12
SCHEDULING :
THE MULTI -L EVEL FEEDBACK QUEUE
Homework (Simulation)
This program, mlfq.py, allows you to see how the MLFQ scheduler
presented in this chapter behaves. See the README for details.
Questions
1. Run a few randomly-generated problems with just two jobs and
two queues; compute the MLFQ execution trace for each. Make
your life easier by limiting the length of each job and turning off
I/Os.
2. How would you run the scheduler to reproduce each of the exam-
ples in the chapter?
3. How would you conﬁgure the scheduler parameters to behave just
like a round-robin scheduler?
4. Craft a workload with two jobs and scheduler parameters so tha t
one job takes advantage of the older Rules 4a and 4b (turned on
with the -S ﬂag) to game the scheduler and obtain 99% of the CPU
over a particular time interval.
5. Given a system with a quantum length of 10 ms in its highest qu eue,
how often would you have to boost jobs back to the highest priority
level (with the -B ﬂag) in order to guarantee that a single long-
running (and potentially-starving) job gets at least 5% of the C PU?
6. One question that arises in scheduling is which end of a queue to
add a job that just ﬁnished I/O; the -I ﬂag changes this behavior
for this scheduling simulator. Play around with some workloads
and see if you can see the effect of this ﬂag.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG