26
Concurrency: An Introduction
Thus far, we have seen the development of the basic abstractions that
the OS performs. We have seen how to take a single physical CPU an d
turn it into multiple virtual CPUs, thus enabling the illusion of multiple
programs running at the same time. We have also seen how to creat e the
illusion of a large, private virtual memory for each process; this abstrac-
tion of the address space enables each program to behave as if it has its
own memory when indeed the OS is secretly multiplexing address spaces
across physical memory (and sometimes, disk).
In this chapter, we introduce a new abstraction for a single runn ing
process: that of a thread. Instead of our classic view of a single point of
execution within a program (i.e., a single PC where instruction s are being
fetched from and executed), a multi-threaded program has more than
one point of execution (i.e., multiple PCs, each of which is being f etched
and executed from). Perhaps another way to think of this is that e ach
thread is very much like a separate process, except for one diffe rence:
they share the same address space and thus can access the same data.
The state of a single thread is thus very similar to that of a proce ss.
It has a program counter (PC) that tracks where the program is fet ch-
ing instructions from. Each thread has its own private set of regi sters it
uses for computation; thus, if there are two threads that are run ning on
a single processor, when switching from running one (T1) to runni ng the
other (T2), a context switch must take place. The context switch between
threads is quite similar to the context switch between process es, as the
register state of T1 must be saved and the register state of T2 re stored
before running T2. With processes, we saved state to a process control
block (PCB); now, we’ll need one or more thread control blocks (TCBs)
to store the state of each thread of a process. There is one major difference,
though, in the context switch we perform between threads as compa red
to processes: the address space remains the same (i.e., there is no need to
switch which page table we are using).
One other major difference between threads and processes concer ns
the stack. In our simple model of the address space of a classic proc ess
1

2 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
16KB
15KB
2KB
1KB
0KB
Stack
(free)
Heap
Program Code the code segment:
where instructions live
the heap segment:
contains malloc’d data
dynamic data structures
(it grows positively)
(it grows negatively)
the stack segment:
contains local variables
arguments to routines, 
return values, etc.
16KB
15KB
2KB
1KB
0KB
Stack (1)
Stack (2)
(free)
(free)
Heap
Program Code
Figure 26.1: Single-Threaded And Multi-Threaded Address Spaces
(which we can now call a single-threaded process), there is a single stack,
usually residing at the bottom of the address space (Figure 26.1 , left).
However, in a multi-threaded process, each thread runs independently
and of course may call into various routines to do whatever work it i s do-
ing. Instead of a single stack in the address space, there will be one per
thread. Let’s say we have a multi-threaded process that has two threads
in it; the resulting address space looks different (Figure 26. 1, right).
In this ﬁgure, you can see two stacks spread throughout the addre ss
space of the process. Thus, any stack-allocated variables, par ameters, re-
turn values, and other things that we put on the stack will be pla ced in
what is sometimes called thread-local storage, i.e., the stack of the rele-
vant thread.
You might also notice how this ruins our beautiful address space l ay-
out. Before, the stack and heap could grow independently and troub le
only arose when you ran out of room in the address space. Here, we
no longer have such a nice situation. Fortunately , this is usual ly OK, as
stacks do not generally have to be very large (the exception bei ng in pro-
grams that make heavy use of recursion).
26.1 Why Use Threads?
Before getting into the details of threads and some of the problems you
might have in writing multi-threaded programs, let’s ﬁrst ans wer a more
simple question. Why should you use threads at all?
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 3
As it turns out, there are at least two major reasons you should use
threads. The ﬁrst is simple: parallelism. Imagine you are writing a pro-
gram that performs operations on very large arrays, for example, a dding
two large arrays together, or incrementing the value of each ele ment in
the array by some amount. If you are running on just a single proces-
sor, the task is straightforward: just perform each operation and be done.
However, if you are executing the program on a system with multipl e
processors, you have the potential of speeding up this process consi der-
ably by using the processors to each perform a portion of the work. The
task of transforming your standard single-threaded program into a pro-
gram that does this sort of work on multiple CPUs is called paralleliza-
tion, and using a thread per CPU to do this work is a natural and typic al
way to make programs run faster on modern hardware.
The second reason is a bit more subtle: to avoid blocking program
progress due to slow I/O. Imagine that you are writing a program th at
performs different types of I/O: either waiting to send or recei ve a mes-
sage, for an explicit disk I/O to complete, or even (implicitly) for a page
fault to ﬁnish. Instead of waiting, your program may wish to do som e-
thing else, including utilizing the CPU to perform computation , or even
issuing further I/O requests. Using threads is a natural way to avoid
getting stuck; while one thread in your program waits (i.e., is b locked
waiting for I/O), the CPU scheduler can switch to other threads , which
are ready to run and do something useful. Threading enables overlap of
I/O with other activities within a single program, much like multipro-
gramming did for processes across programs; as a result, many modern
server-based applications (web servers, database manageme nt systems,
and the like) make use of threads in their implementations.
Of course, in either of the cases mentioned above, you could use multi-
ple processes instead of threads. However, threads share an address space
and thus make it easy to share data, and hence are a natural choi ce when
constructing these types of programs. Processes are a more sound ch oice
for logically separate tasks where little sharing of data struc tures in mem-
ory is needed.
26.2 An Example: Thread Creation
Let’s get into some of the details. Say we wanted to run a program
that creates two threads, each of which does some independent wor k, in
this case printing “A” or “B”. The code is shown in Figure 26.2 (pa ge 4).
The main program creates two threads, each of which will run the
function mythread(), though with different arguments (the string A or
B). Once a thread is created, it may start running right away (d epending
on the whims of the scheduler); alternately , it may be put in a “ready” but
not “running” state and thus not run yet. Of course, on a multiproce ssor,
the threads could even be running at the same time, but let’s not w orry
about this possibility quite yet.
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

4 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 #include <assert.h>
3 #include <pthread.h>
4 #include "common.h"
5 #include "common_threads.h"
6
7 void *mythread(void *arg) {
8 printf("%s\n", (char *) arg);
9 return NULL;
10 }
11
12 int
13 main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
14 pthread_t p1, p2;
15 int rc;
16 printf("main: begin\n");
17 Pthread_create(&p1, NULL, mythread, "A");
18 Pthread_create(&p2, NULL, mythread, "B");
19 // join waits for the threads to finish
20 Pthread_join(p1, NULL);
21 Pthread_join(p2, NULL);
22 printf("main: end\n");
23 return 0;
24 }
Figure 26.2: Simple Thread Creation Code (t0.c)
After creating the two threads (let’s call them T1 and T2), the main
thread calls pthread_join(), which waits for a particular thread to
complete. It does so twice, thus ensuring T1 and T2 will run and c om-
plete before ﬁnally allowing the main thread to run again; when it does,
it will print “main: end” and exit. Overall, three threads we re employed
during this run: the main thread, T1, and T2.
Let us examine the possible execution ordering of this little prog ram.
In the execution diagram (Figure 26.3, page 5), time increases in the down-
wards direction, and each column shows when a different thread ( the
main one, or Thread 1, or Thread 2) is running.
Note, however, that this ordering is not the only possible ordering. In
fact, given a sequence of instructions, there are quite a few, d epending on
which thread the scheduler decides to run at a given point. For e xample,
once a thread is created, it may run immediately , which would lead to the
execution shown in Figure 26.4 (page 5).
We also could even see “B” printed before “A”, if, say , the sched uler
decided to run Thread 2 ﬁrst even though Thread 1 was created ea rlier;
there is no reason to assume that a thread that is created ﬁrst will run ﬁrst.
Figure 26.5 (page 6) shows this ﬁnal execution ordering, with Th read 2
getting to strut its stuff before Thread 1.
As you might be able to see, one way to think about thread creation
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 5
main Thread 1 Thread2
starts running
prints “main: begin”
creates Thread 1
creates Thread 2
waits for T1
runs
prints “A”
returns
waits for T2
runs
prints “B”
returns
prints “main: end”
Figure 26.3: Thread T race (1)
main Thread 1 Thread2
starts running
prints “main: begin”
creates Thread 1
runs
prints “A”
returns
creates Thread 2
runs
prints “B”
returns
waits for T1
returns immediately; T1 is done
waits for T2
returns immediately; T2 is done
prints “main: end”
Figure 26.4: Thread T race (2)
is that it is a bit like making a function call; however, instead of ﬁrst ex-
ecuting the function and then returning to the caller, the sys tem instead
creates a new thread of execution for the routine that is being cal led, and
it runs independently of the caller, perhaps before returning from the cre-
ate, but perhaps much later. What runs next is determined by t he OS
scheduler, and although the scheduler likely implements some sensible
algorithm, it is hard to know what will run at any given moment in t ime.
As you also might be able to tell from this example, threads make life
complicated: it is already hard to tell what will run when! Comp uters are
hard enough to understand without concurrency . Unfortunately , with
concurrency , it simply gets worse. Much worse.
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

6 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
main Thread 1 Thread2
starts running
prints “main: begin”
creates Thread 1
creates Thread 2
runs
prints “B”
returns
waits for T1
runs
prints “A”
returns
waits for T2
returns immediately; T2 is done
prints “main: end”
Figure 26.5: Thread T race (3)
26.3 Why It Gets Worse: Shared Data
The simple thread example we showed above was useful in showing
how threads are created and how they can run in different orders depend-
ing on how the scheduler decides to run them. What it doesn’t show you ,
though, is how threads interact when they access shared data.
Let us imagine a simple example where two threads wish to upda te a
global shared variable. The code we’ll study is in Figure 26.6 (p age 7).
Here are a few notes about the code. First, as Stevens suggests [SR0 5],
we wrap the thread creation and join routines to simply exit on fai lure;
for a program as simple as this one, we want to at least notice an err or
occurred (if it did), but not do anything very smart about it (e.g ., just
exit). Thus, Pthread_create() simply calls pthread_create() and
makes sure the return code is 0; if it isn’t, Pthread_create() just prints
a message and exits.
Second, instead of using two separate function bodies for the worker
threads, we just use a single piece of code, and pass the thread a n argu-
ment (in this case, a string) so we can have each thread print a different
letter before its messages.
Finally , and most importantly , we can now look at what each worker is
trying to do: add a number to the shared variable counter, and do so 10
million times (1e7) in a loop. Thus, the desired ﬁnal result is: 2 0,000,000.
We now compile and run the program, to see how it behaves. Some-
times, everything works how we might expect:
prompt> gcc -o main main.c -Wall -pthread; ./main
main: begin (counter = 0)
A: begin
B: begin
A: done
B: done
main: done with both (counter = 20000000)
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 7
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 #include <pthread.h>
3 #include "common.h"
4 #include "common_threads.h"
5
6 static volatile int counter = 0;
7
8 // mythread()
9 //
10 // Simply adds 1 to counter repeatedly, in a loop
11 // No, this is not how you would add 10,000,000 to
12 // a counter, but it shows the problem nicely.
13 //
14 void *mythread(void *arg) {
15 printf("%s: begin\n", (char *) arg);
16 int i;
17 for (i = 0; i < 1e7; i++) {
18 counter = counter + 1;
19 }
20 printf("%s: done\n", (char *) arg);
21 return NULL;
22 }
23
24 // main()
25 //
26 // Just launches two threads (pthread_create)
27 // and then waits for them (pthread_join)
28 //
29 int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
30 pthread_t p1, p2;
31 printf("main: begin (counter = %d)\n", counter);
32 Pthread_create(&p1, NULL, mythread, "A");
33 Pthread_create(&p2, NULL, mythread, "B");
34
35 // join waits for the threads to finish
36 Pthread_join(p1, NULL);
37 Pthread_join(p2, NULL);
38 printf("main: done with both (counter = %d)\n",
39 counter);
40 return 0;
41 }
Figure 26.6: Sharing Data: Uh Oh (t1.c)
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

8 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
Unfortunately , when we run this code, even on a single processor, w e
don’t necessarily get the desired result. Sometimes, we get:
prompt> ./main
main: begin (counter = 0)
A: begin
B: begin
A: done
B: done
main: done with both (counter = 19345221)
Let’s try it one more time, just to see if we’ve gone crazy . After all ,
aren’t computers supposed to produce deterministic results, as you have
been taught?! Perhaps your professors have been lying to you? (gasp)
prompt> ./main
main: begin (counter = 0)
A: begin
B: begin
A: done
B: done
main: done with both (counter = 19221041)
Not only is each run wrong, but also yields a different result! A big
question remains: why does this happen?
TIP : K NOW AND USE YOUR TOOLS
You should always learn new tools that help you write, debug, and un -
derstand computer systems. Here, we use a neat tool called a disassem-
bler. When you run a disassembler on an executable, it shows you what
assembly instructions make up the program. For example, if we wi sh to
understand the low-level code to update a counter (as in our examp le),
we run objdump (Linux) to see the assembly code:
prompt> objdump -d main
Doing so produces a long listing of all the instructions in the progr am,
neatly labeled (particularly if you compiled with the -g ﬂag), which in-
cludes symbol information in the program. The objdump program is just
one of many tools you should learn how to use; a debugger like gdb,
memory proﬁlers like valgrind or purify, and of course the compiler
itself are others that you should spend time to learn more about; the better
you are at using your tools, the better systems you’ll be able to buil d.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 9
26.4 The Heart Of The Problem: Uncontrolled Scheduling
To understand why this happens, we must understand the code se -
quence that the compiler generates for the update to counter. In this
case, we wish to simply add a number (1) to counter. Thus, the code
sequence for doing so might look something like this (in x86);
mov 0x8049a1c, %eax
add $0x1, %eax
mov %eax, 0x8049a1c
This example assumes that the variable counter is located at address
0x8049a1c. In this three-instruction sequence, the x86 mov instruction is
used ﬁrst to get the memory value at the address and put it into r egister
eax. Then, the add is performed, adding 1 (0x1) to the contents of the
eax register, and ﬁnally , the contents ofeax are stored back into memory
at the same address.
Let us imagine one of our two threads (Thread 1) enters this region of
code, and is thus about to increment counter by one. It loads the value
of counter (let’s say it’s 50 to begin with) into its register eax. Thus,
eax=50 for Thread 1. Then it adds one to the register; thus eax=51.
Now, something unfortunate happens: a timer interrupt goes off; t hus,
the OS saves the state of the currently running thread (its PC, its registers
including eax, etc.) to the thread’s TCB.
Now something worse happens: Thread 2 is chosen to run, and it en-
ters this same piece of code. It also executes the ﬁrst instruct ion, getting
the value of counter and putting it into its eax (remember: each thread
when running has its own private registers; the registers are virtualized
by the context-switch code that saves and restores them). The va lue of
counter is still 50 at this point, and thus Thread 2 has eax=50. Let’s
then assume that Thread 2 executes the next two instructions, increment-
ing eax by 1 (thus eax=51), and then saving the contents of eax into
counter (address 0x8049a1c). Thus, the global variable counter now
has the value 51.
Finally , another context switch occurs, and Thread 1 resumes running.
Recall that it had just executed the mov and add, and is now about to
perform the ﬁnal mov instruction. Recall also that eax=51. Thus, the ﬁnal
mov instruction executes, and saves the value to memory; the counte r is
set to 51 again.
Put simply , what has happened is this: the code to incrementcounter
has been run twice, but counter, which started at 50, is now only equal
to 51. A “correct” version of this program should have resulted in t he
variable counter equal to 52.
Let’s look at a detailed execution trace to understand the problem bet-
ter. Assume, for this example, that the above code is loaded at add ress
100 in memory , like the following sequence (note for those of you used t o
nice, RISC-like instruction sets: x86 has variable-length in structions; this
mov instruction takes up 5 bytes of memory , and the add only 3):
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

10 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
(after instruction)
OS Thread 1 Thread 2 PC eax counter
before critical section 100 0 50
mov 8049a1c,%eax 105 50 50
add $0x1,%eax 108 51 50
interrupt
save T1
restore T2 100 0 50
mov 8049a1c,%eax 105 50 50
add $0x1,%eax 108 51 50
mov %eax,8049a1c 113 51 51
interrupt
save T2
restore T1 108 51 51
mov %eax,8049a1c 113 51 51
Figure 26.7: The Problem: Up Close and Personal
100 mov 0x8049a1c, %eax
105 add $0x1, %eax
108 mov %eax, 0x8049a1c
With these assumptions, what happens is shown in Figure 26.7 (p age
10). Assume the counter starts at value 50, and trace through this example
to make sure you understand what is going on.
What we have demonstrated here is called a race condition (or, more
speciﬁcally , adata race): the results depend on the timing of the code’s ex-
ecution. With some bad luck (i.e., context switches that occur at untimely
points in the execution), we get the wrong result. In fact, we may get a dif-
ferent result each time; thus, instead of a nice deterministic computation
(which we are used to from computers), we call this result indeterminate,
where it is not known what the output will be and it is indeed likel y to be
different across runs.
Because multiple threads executing this code can result in a r ace con-
dition, we call this code a critical section. A critical section is a piece of
code that accesses a shared variable (or more generally , a shared resource)
and must not be concurrently executed by more than one thread.
What we really want for this code is what we call mutual exclusion .
This property guarantees that if one thread is executing withi n the critical
section, the others will be prevented from doing so.
Virtually all of these terms, by the way , were coined by Edsger D ijk-
stra, who was a pioneer in the ﬁeld and indeed won the Turing Awar d
because of this and other work; see his 1968 paper on “Cooperating Se-
quential Processes” [D68] for an amazingly clear description of the prob-
lem. We’ll be hearing more about Dijkstra in this section of the book.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 11
TIP : U SE ATOMIC OPERATIONS
Atomic operations are one of the most powerful underlying technique s
in building computer systems, from the computer architecture, to concur-
rent code (what we are studying here), to ﬁle systems (which we ’ll study
soon enough), database management systems, and even distribut ed sys-
tems [L+93].
The idea behind making a series of actions atomic is simply expressed
with the phrase “all or nothing”; it should either appear as if al l of the ac-
tions you wish to group together occurred, or that none of them occurred,
with no in-between state visible. Sometimes, the grouping of man y ac-
tions into a single atomic action is called a transaction, an idea devel-
oped in great detail in the world of databases and transaction proc essing
[GR92].
In our theme of exploring concurrency , we’ll be using synchronizat ion
primitives to turn short sequences of instructions into atomic b locks of
execution, but the idea of atomicity is much bigger than that, as we will
see. For example, ﬁle systems use techniques such as journalin g or copy-
on-write in order to atomically transition their on-disk state, c ritical for
operating correctly in the face of system failures. If that doesn ’t make
sense, don’t worry — it will, in some future chapter.
26.5 The Wish For Atomicity
One way to solve this problem would be to have more powerful in-
structions that, in a single step, did exactly whatever we nee ded done
and thus removed the possibility of an untimely interrupt. For ex ample,
what if we had a super instruction that looked like this:
memory-add 0x8049a1c, $0x1
Assume this instruction adds a value to a memory location, and the
hardware guarantees that it executes atomically; when the instruction
executed, it would perform the update as desired. It could not be i nter-
rupted mid-instruction, because that is precisely the guarantee we receive
from the hardware: when an interrupt occurs, either the instru ction has
not run at all, or it has run to completion; there is no in-between s tate.
Hardware can be a beautiful thing, no?
Atomically , in this context, means “as a unit”, which sometimes we
take as “all or none.” What we’d like is to execute the three instr uction
sequence atomically:
mov 0x8049a1c, %eax
add $0x1, %eax
mov %eax, 0x8049a1c
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

12 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
As we said, if we had a single instruction to do this, we could jus t
issue that instruction and be done. But in the general case, we w on’t have
such an instruction. Imagine we were building a concurrent B-t ree, and
wished to update it; would we really want the hardware to suppor t an
“atomic update of B-tree” instruction? Probably not, at least in a sane
instruction set.
Thus, what we will instead do is ask the hardware for a few usefu l
instructions upon which we can build a general set of what we call syn-
chronization primitives . By using this hardware support, in combina-
tion with some help from the operating system, we will be able to bu ild
multi-threaded code that accesses critical sections in a sync hronized and
controlled manner, and thus reliably produces the correct resul t despite
the challenging nature of concurrent execution. Pretty awesome , right?
This is the problem we will study in this section of the book. It is a
wonderful and hard problem, and should make your mind hurt (a bit) .
If it doesn’t, then you don’t understand! Keep working until your hea d
hurts; you then know you’re headed in the right direction. At that p oint,
take a break; we don’t want your head hurting too much.
HOW TO SUPPORT SYNCHRONIZATION
What support do we need from the hardware in order to build use-
ful synchronization primitives? What support do we need from the OS?
How can we build these primitives correctly and efﬁciently? How can
programs use them to get the desired results?
26.6 One More Problem: Waiting For Another
This chapter has set up the problem of concurrency as if only one typ e
of interaction occurs between threads, that of accessing shared variables
and the need to support atomicity for critical sections. As it tur ns out,
there is another common interaction that arises, where one thread must
wait for another to complete some action before it continues. This in ter-
action arises, for example, when a process performs a disk I/O and is put
to sleep; when the I/O completes, the process needs to be roused f rom its
slumber so it can continue.
Thus, in the coming chapters, we’ll be not only studying how to buil d
support for synchronization primitives to support atomicity but a lso for
mechanisms to support this type of sleeping/waking interacti on that is
common in multi-threaded programs. If this doesn’t make sense rig ht
now, that is OK! It will soon enough, when you read the chapter on con-
dition variables . If it doesn’t by then, well, then it is less OK, and you
should read that chapter again (and again) until it does make se nse.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 13
ASIDE : K EY CONCURRENCY TERMS
CRITICAL SECTION , R ACE CONDITION ,
INDETERMINATE , M UTUAL EXCLUSION
These four terms are so central to concurrent code that we thought it
worth while to call them out explicitly . See some of Dijkstra’s earl y work
[D65,D68] for more details.
• A critical section is a piece of code that accesses a shared resource,
usually a variable or data structure.
• A race condition (or data race [NM92]) arises if multiple threads of
execution enter the critical section at roughly the same time; b oth
attempt to update the shared data structure, leading to a sur prising
(and perhaps undesirable) outcome.
• An indeterminate program consists of one or more race conditions;
the output of the program varies from run to run, depending on
which threads ran when. The outcome is thus not deterministic,
something we usually expect from computer systems.
• To avoid these problems, threads should use some kind of mutual
exclusion primitives; doing so guarantees that only a single thread
ever enters a critical section, thus avoiding races, and resul ting in
deterministic program outputs.
26.7 Summary: Why in OS Class?
Before wrapping up, one question that you might have is: why are we
studying this in OS class? “History” is the one-word answer; the OS was
the ﬁrst concurrent program, and many techniques were created for use
within the OS. Later, with multi-threaded processes, application program-
mers also had to consider such things.
For example, imagine the case where there are two processes run ning.
Assume they both call write() to write to the ﬁle, and both wish to
append the data to the ﬁle (i.e., add the data to the end of the ﬁl e, thus
increasing its length). To do so, both must allocate a new block, r ecord
in the inode of the ﬁle where this block lives, and change the size of the
ﬁle to reﬂect the new larger size (among other things; we’ll lear n more
about ﬁles in the third part of the book). Because an interrupt may occur
at any time, the code that updates these shared structures (e. g., a bitmap
for allocation, or the ﬁle’s inode) are critical sections; thus, OS d esign-
ers, from the very beginning of the introduction of the interrupt, had to
worry about how the OS updates internal structures. An untimely inter-
rupt causes all of the problems described above. Not surprisingl y , page
tables, process lists, ﬁle system structures, and virtually every kernel data
structure has to be carefully accessed, with the proper synch ronization
primitives, to work correctly .
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

14 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
References
[D65] “Solution of a problem in concurrent programming control” by E. W. Dijkstra. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 8(9):569, September 1965. Pointed to as the ﬁrst paper of Dijkstra’s where
he outlines the mutual exclusion problem and a solution. The solution, howeve r, is not widely used;
advanced hardware and OS support is needed, as we will see in the coming c hapters.
[D68] “Cooperating sequential processes” by Edsger W. Dijkstra . 1968. Available at this site:
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/ewd01xx/EWD123.PDF. Dijkstra has an amaz-
ing number of his old papers, notes, and thoughts recorded (for posterity) on thi s website at the last
place he worked, the University of T exas. Much of his foundational work, howeve r, was done years
earlier while he was at the T echnische Hogeschool Eindhoven (THE), incl uding this famous paper on
“cooperating sequential processes”, which basically outlines all of the thi nking that has to go into writ-
ing multi-threaded programs. Dijkstra discovered much of this while worki ng on an operating system
named after his school: the “THE” operating system (said “T”, “H”, “E”, and n ot like the word “the”).
[GR92] “Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques” by Jim Gray and And reas Reuter.
Morgan Kaufmann, September 1992. This book is the bible of transaction processing, written by one
of the legends of the ﬁeld, Jim Gray. It is, for this reason, also considered Ji m Gray’s “brain dump”,
in which he wrote down everything he knows about how database management system s work. Sadly,
Gray passed away tragically a few years back, and many of us lost a friend and gre at mentor, including
the co-authors of said book, who were lucky enough to interact with Gray during thei r graduate school
years.
[L+93] “Atomic Transactions” by Nancy Lynch, Michael Merritt, William Wei hl, Alan Fekete.
Morgan Kaufmann, August 1993. A nice text on some of the theory and practice of atomic transac-
tions for distributed systems. Perhaps a bit formal for some, but lots of good mate rial is found herein.
[NM92] “What Are Race Conditions? Some Issues and Formalizations” by Robert H. B. Netzer
and Barton P . Miller. ACM Letters on Programming Languages and Syst ems, V olume 1:1,
March 1992. An excellent discussion of the different types of races found in concu rrent programs. In
this chapter (and the next few), we focus on data races, but later we will broaden to discuss general
races as well.
[SR05] “Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment” by W. Richard Stevens and Stephen
A. Rago. Addison-Wesley , 2005. As we’ve said many times, buy this book, and read it, in little
chunks, preferably before going to bed. This way, you will actually fall as leep more quickly; more im-
portantly, you learn a little more about how to become a serious UNIX programmer.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

CONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION 15
Homework (Simulation)
This program, x86.py, allows you to see how different thread inter-
leavings either cause or avoid race conditions. See the README for d e-
tails on how the program works, then answer the questions below.
Questions
1. Let’s examine a simple program, “loop.s”. First, just read and un-
derstand it. Then, run it with these arguments ( ./x86.py -t 1
-p loop.s -i 100 -R dx ) This speciﬁes a single thread, an in-
terrupt every 100 instructions, and tracing of register %dx. What
will %dx be during the run? Use the -c ﬂag to check your answers;
the answers, on the left, show the value of the register (or memory
value) after the instruction on the right has run.
2. Same code, different ﬂags: ( ./x86.py -p loop.s -t 2 -i 100
-a dx=3,dx=3 -R dx ) This speciﬁes two threads, and initializes
each %dx to 3. What values will %dx see? Run with -c to check.
Does the presence of multiple threads affect your calculations? Is
there a race in this code?
3. Run this: ./x86.py -p loop.s -t 2 -i 3 -r -R dx -a
dx=3,dx=3 This makes the interrupt interval small/random; use
different seeds ( -s) to see different interleavings. Does the inter-
rupt frequency change anything?
4. Now, a different program, looping-race-nolock.s, which ac-
cesses a shared variable located at address 2000; we’ll call th is vari-
able value. Run it with a single thread to conﬁrm your under-
standing: ./x86.py -p looping-race-nolock.s -t 1 -M
2000 What is value (i.e., at memory address 2000) throughout the
run? Use -c to check.
5. Run with multiple iterations/threads: ./x86.py -p
looping-race-nolock.s -t 2 -a bx=3 -M 2000 Why does
each thread loop three times? What is ﬁnal value of value?
6. Run with random interrupt intervals: ./x86.py -p
looping-race-nolock.s -t 2 -M 2000 -i 4 -r -s 0 with
different seeds ( -s 1 , -s 2 , etc.) Can you tell by looking at the
thread interleaving what the ﬁnal value of value will be? Does the
timing of the interrupt matter? Where can it safely occur? Wher e
not? In other words, where is the critical section exactly?
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

16 C ONCURRENCY : A N INTRODUCTION
7. Now examine ﬁxed interrupt intervals: ./x86.py -p
looping-race-nolock.s -a bx=1 -t 2 -M 2000 -i 1 What
will the ﬁnal value of the shared variable value be? What about
when you change -i 2 , -i 3 , etc.? For which interrupt intervals
does the program give the “correct” answer?
8. Run the same for more loops (e.g., set -a bx=100 ). What inter-
rupt intervals ( -i) lead to a correct outcome? Which intervals are
surprising?
9. One last program: wait-for-me.s. Run: ./x86.py -p
wait-for-me.s -a ax=1,ax=0 -R ax -M 2000 This sets the
%ax register to 1 for thread 0, and 0 for thread 1, and watches %ax
and memory location 2000. How should the code behave? How is
the value at location 2000 being used by the threads? What will i ts
ﬁnal value be?
10. Now switch the inputs: ./x86.py -p wait-for-me.s -a
ax=0,ax=1 -R ax -M 2000 How do the threads behave? What
is thread 0 doing? How would changing the interrupt interval (e. g.,
-i 1000 , or perhaps to use random intervals) change the trace out-
come? Is the program efﬁciently using the CPU?
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG