18
Paging: Introduction
It is sometimes said that the operating system takes one of two ap-
proaches when solving most any space-management problem. The ﬁr st
approach is to chop things up into variable-sized pieces, as we saw with
segmentation in virtual memory . Unfortunately , this solution has inher-
ent difﬁculties. In particular, when dividing a space into d ifferent-size
chunks, the space itself can become fragmented, and thus allocation be-
comes more challenging over time.
Thus, it may be worth considering the second approach: to chop up
space into ﬁxed-sized pieces. In virtual memory , we call this idea paging,
and it goes back to an early and important system, the Atlas [KE+62, L78].
Instead of splitting up a process’s address space into some numbe r of
variable-sized logical segments (e.g., code, heap, stack), w e divide it into
ﬁxed-sized units, each of which we call a page. Correspondingly , we view
physical memory as an array of ﬁxed-sized slots called page frames; each
of these frames can contain a single virtual-memory page. Our ch allenge:
THE CRUX : H OW TO VIRTUALIZE MEMORY WITH PAGES
How can we virtualize memory with pages, so as to avoid the prob-
lems of segmentation? What are the basic techniques? How do we ma ke
those techniques work well, with minimal space and time overhea ds?
18.1 A Simple Example And Overview
To help make this approach more clear, let’s illustrate it with a simple
example. Figure 18.1 (page 2) presents an example of a tiny address space,
only 64 bytes total in size, with four 16-byte pages (virtual pag es 0, 1, 2,
and 3). Real address spaces are much bigger, of course, commonly 3 2 bits
and thus 4-GB of address space, or even 64 bits 1; in the book, we’ll often
use tiny examples to make them easier to digest.
1A 64-bit address space is hard to imagine, it is so amazingly large. An analogy might
help: if you think of a 32-bit address space as the size of a tennis court, a 64-bit address space
is about the size of Europe(!).
1

2 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
64
48
32
16
0
(page 3)
(page 2)
(page 1)
(page 0 of the address space)
Figure 18.1: A Simple 64-byte Address Space
Physical memory , as shown in Figure 18.2, also consists of a numbe r
of ﬁxed-sized slots, in this case eight page frames (making for a 128-byte
physical memory , also ridiculously small). As you can see in thediagram,
the pages of the virtual address space have been placed at diff erent loca-
tions throughout physical memory; the diagram also shows the OS us ing
some of physical memory for itself.
Paging, as we will see, has a number of advantages over our previou s
approaches. Probably the most important improvement will be ﬂexibil-
ity: with a fully-developed paging approach, the system will be ab le to
support the abstraction of an address space effectively , regardless of how
a process uses the address space; we won’t, for example, make assu mp-
tions about the direction the heap and stack grow and how they are us ed.
128
112
96
80
64
48
32
16
0
page frame 7
page frame 6
page frame 5
page frame 4
page frame 3
page frame 2
page frame 1
page frame 0 of physical memory reserved for OS
(unused)
page 3 of AS
page 0 of AS
(unused)
page 2 of AS
(unused)
page 1 of AS
Figure 18.2: A 64-Byte Address Space In A 128-Byte Physical Memory
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 3
Another advantage is the simplicity of free-space management that pag-
ing affords. For example, when the OS wishes to place our tiny 64- byte
address space into our eight-page physical memory , it simply ﬁ nds four
free pages; perhaps the OS keeps a free list of all free pages for this, and
just grabs the ﬁrst four free pages off of this list. In the exampl e, the OS
has placed virtual page 0 of the address space (AS) in physical f rame 3,
virtual page 1 of the AS in physical frame 7, page 2 in frame 5, an d page
3 in frame 2. Page frames 1, 4, and 6 are currently free.
To record where each virtual page of the address space is placed in
physical memory , the operating system usually keeps a per-process data
structure known as a page table . The major role of the page table is to
store address translations for each of the virtual pages of the address
space, thus letting us know where in physical memory each page r esides.
For our simple example (Figure 18.2, page 2), the page table woul d thus
have the following four entries: (Virtual Page 0 → Physical Frame 3),
(VP 1 → PF 7), (VP 2 → PF 5), and (VP 3 → PF 2).
It is important to remember that this page table is a per-process data
structure (most page table structures we discuss are per-proc ess struc-
tures; an exception we’ll touch on is the inverted page table ). If another
process were to run in our example above, the OS would have to manag e
a different page table for it, as its virtual pages obviously map to different
physical pages (modulo any sharing going on).
Now, we know enough to perform an address-translation example.
Let’s imagine the process with that tiny address space (64 byte s) is per-
forming a memory access:
movl <virtual address>, %eax
Speciﬁcally , let’s pay attention to the explicit load of the data f rom
address <virtual address> into the register eax (and thus ignore the
instruction fetch that must have happened prior).
To translate this virtual address that the process generated, we have
to ﬁrst split it into two components: the virtual page number (VPN), and
the offset within the page. For this example, because the virtual addres s
space of the process is 64 bytes, we need 6 bits total for our virtual address
(26 = 64 ). Thus, our virtual address can be conceptualized as follows:
Va5 Va4 Va3 Va2 Va1 Va0
In this diagram, Va5 is the highest-order bit of the virtual add ress, and
Va0 the lowest-order bit. Because we know the page size (16 bytes ), we
can further divide the virtual address as follows:
Va5 Va4 Va3 Va2 Va1 Va0
VPN offset
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

4 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
The page size is 16 bytes in a 64-byte address space; thus we ne ed to
be able to select 4 pages, and the top 2 bits of the address do just that.
Thus, we have a 2-bit virtual page number (VPN). The remainin g bits tell
us which byte of the page we are interested in, 4 bits in this cas e; we call
this the offset.
When a process generates a virtual address, the OS and hardwar e
must combine to translate it into a meaningful physical addre ss. For ex-
ample, let us assume the load above was to virtual address 21:
movl 21, %eax
Turning “21” into binary form, we get “010101”, and thus we can ex-
amine this virtual address and see how it breaks down into a virt ual page
number (VPN) and offset:
0 1 0 1 0 1
VPN offset
Thus, the virtual address “21” is on the 5th (“0101”th) byte of v irtual
page “01” (or 1). With our virtual page number, we can now index our
page table and ﬁnd which physical frame virtual page 1 resides within. In
the page table above the physical frame number (PFN) (also sometimes
called the physical page number or PPN) is 7 (binary 111). Thus, we can
translate this virtual address by replacing the VPN with the PFN and then
issue the load to physical memory (Figure 18.3).
0 1 0 1 0 1
VPN offset
1 1 1 0 1 0 1
Address
Translation
PFN offset
Virtual
Address
Physical
Address
Figure 18.3: The Address T ranslation Process
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 5
128
112
96
80
64
48
32
16
0
page frame 7
page frame 6
page frame 5
page frame 4
page frame 3
page frame 2
page frame 1
page frame 0 of physical memory
(unused)
page 3 of AS
page 0 of AS
(unused)
page 2 of AS
(unused)
page 1 of AS
page table:
3 7 5 2
Figure 18.4: Example: Page T able in Kernel Physical Memory
Note the offset stays the same (i.e., it is not translated), beca use the
offset just tells us which byte within the page we want. Our ﬁnal physical
address is 1110101 (117 in decimal), and is exactly where we w ant our
load to fetch data from (Figure 18.2, page 2).
With this basic overview in mind, we can now ask (and hopefully ,
answer) a few basic questions you may have about paging. For examp le,
where are these page tables stored? What are the typical conten ts of the
page table, and how big are the tables? Does paging make the syst em
(too) slow? These and other beguiling questions are answered, at l east in
part, in the text below. Read on!
18.2 Where Are Page Tables Stored?
Page tables can get terribly large, much bigger than the smal l segment
table or base/bounds pair we have discussed previously . For exam ple,
imagine a typical 32-bit address space, with 4KB pages. This virtual ad-
dress splits into a 20-bit VPN and 12-bit offset (recall that 1 0 bits would
be needed for a 1KB page size, and just add two more to get to 4KB).
A 20-bit VPN implies that there are 220 translations that the OS would
have to manage for each process (that’s roughly a million); assumi ng we
need 4 bytes per page table entry (PTE) to hold the physical translation
plus any other useful stuff, we get an immense 4MB of memory neede d
for each page table! That is pretty large. Now imagine there are 100
processes running: this means the OS would need 400MB of memory
just for all those address translations! Even in the modern era, w here
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

6 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
ASIDE : D ATA STRUCTURE — T HE PAGE TABLE
One of the most important data structures in the memory managemen t
subsystem of a modern OS is the page table . In general, a page table
stores virtual-to-physical address translations , thus letting the system
know where each page of an address space actually resides in phy sical
memory . Because each address space requires such translation s, in gen-
eral there is one page table per process in the system. The exact structure
of the page table is either determined by the hardware (older sy stems) or
can be more ﬂexibly managed by the OS (modern systems).
machines have gigabytes of memory , it seems a little crazy to us e a large
chunk of it just for translations, no? And we won’t even think about how
big such a page table would be for a 64-bit address space; that wou ld be
too gruesome and perhaps scare you off entirely .
Because page tables are so big, we don’t keep any special on-chip hard-
ware in the MMU to store the page table of the currently-running process.
Instead, we store the page table for each process in memory somewhere.
Let’s assume for now that the page tables live in physical memory t hat
the OS manages; later we’ll see that much of OS memory itself can b e vir-
tualized, and thus page tables can be stored in OS virtual memor y (and
even swapped to disk), but that is too confusing right now, so we’l l ig-
nore it. In Figure 18.4 (page 5) is a picture of a page table in OS m emory;
see the tiny set of translations in there?
18.3 What’s Actually In The Page Table?
Let’s talk a little about page table organization. The page table is just
a data structure that is used to map virtual addresses (or real ly , virtual
page numbers) to physical addresses (physical frame number s). Thus,
any data structure could work. The simplest form is called a linear page
table, which is just an array . The OS indexes the array by the virtual page
number (VPN), and looks up the page-table entry (PTE) at that in dex in
order to ﬁnd the desired physical frame number (PFN). For now, we will
assume this simple linear structure; in later chapters, we w ill make use of
more advanced data structures to help solve some problems with pa ging.
As for the contents of each PTE, we have a number of different bits
in there worth understanding at some level. A valid bit is common to
indicate whether the particular translation is valid; for exa mple, when
a program starts running, it will have code and heap at one end of it s
address space, and the stack at the other. All the unused space in-between
will be marked invalid, and if the process tries to access such memory , it
will generate a trap to the OS which will likely terminate the process.
Thus, the valid bit is crucial for supporting a sparse address s pace; by
simply marking all the unused pages in the address space inva lid, we
remove the need to allocate physical frames for those pages and thus save
a great deal of memory .
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 7
31 12 11 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
PFN
G
PAT
D
A
PCD
PWT
U/S
R/W
P
Figure 18.5: An x86 Page T able Entry (PTE)
We also might have protection bits, indicating whether the page could
be read from, written to, or executed from. Again, accessing a pag e in a
way not allowed by these bits will generate a trap to the OS.
There are a couple of other bits that are important but we won’t talk
about much for now. A present bit indicates whether this page is in phys-
ical memory or on disk (i.e., it has been swapped out ). We will under-
stand this machinery further when we study how to swap parts of the
address space to disk to support address spaces that are large r than phys-
ical memory; swapping allows the OS to free up physical memory by
moving rarely-used pages to disk. A dirty bit is also common, indicating
whether the page has been modiﬁed since it was brought into memor y .
A reference bit (a.k.a. accessed bit) is sometimes used to track whether
a page has been accessed, and is useful in determining which p ages are
popular and thus should be kept in memory; such knowledge is criti cal
during page replacement, a topic we will study in great detail in subse-
quent chapters.
Figure 18.5 shows an example page table entry from the x86 archi tec-
ture [I09]. It contains a present bit (P); a read/write bit (R/ W) which
determines if writes are allowed to this page; a user/supervi sor bit (U/S)
which determines if user-mode processes can access the page; a few bits
(PWT, PCD, PAT, and G) that determine how hardware caching works for
these pages; an accessed bit (A) and a dirty bit (D); and ﬁnall y , the page
frame number (PFN) itself.
Read the Intel Architecture Manuals [I09] for more details on x8 6 pag-
ing support. Be forewarned, however; reading manuals such as th ese,
while quite informative (and certainly necessary for those who write code
to use such page tables in the OS), can be challenging at ﬁrst. A little pa-
tience, and a lot of desire, is required.
ASIDE : W HY NO VALID BIT ?
You may notice that in the Intel example, there are no separate v alid and
present bits, but rather just a present bit (P). If that bit is set (P=1), it
means the page is both present and valid. If not (P=0), it means t hat
the page may not be present in memory (but is valid), or may not be
valid. An access to a page with P=0 will trigger a trap to the OS; the
OS must then use additional structures it keeps to determine w hether
the page is valid (and thus perhaps should be swapped back in) or not
(and thus the program is attempting to access memory illegally ). This
sort of judiciousness is common in hardware, which often just provid e
the minimal set of features upon which the OS can build a full ser vice.
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

8 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
18.4 Paging: Also Too Slow
With page tables in memory , we already know that they might be too
big. As it turns out, they can slow things down too. For example, take
our simple instruction:
movl 21, %eax
Again, let’s just examine the explicit reference to address 2 1 and not
worry about the instruction fetch. In this example, we’ll assume the hard-
ware performs the translation for us. To fetch the desired data, the system
must ﬁrst translate the virtual address (21) into the correct physical ad-
dress (117). Thus, before fetching the data from address 117, t he system
must ﬁrst fetch the proper page table entry from the process’s pag e table,
perform the translation, and then load the data from physical mem ory .
To do so, the hardware must know where the page table is for the
currently-running process. Let’s assume for now that a single page-table
base register contains the physical address of the starting location of the
page table. To ﬁnd the location of the desired PTE, the hardware w ill thus
perform the following functions:
VPN = (VirtualAddress & VPN_MASK) >> SHIFT
PTEAddr = PageTableBaseRegister + (VPN * sizeof(PTE))
In our example, VPN_MASK would be set to 0x30 (hex 30, or binary
110000) which picks out the VPN bits from the full virtual address; SHIFT
is set to 4 (the number of bits in the offset), such that we move the VPN
bits down to form the correct integer virtual page number. For exa m-
ple, with virtual address 21 (010101), and masking turns thi s value into
010000; the shift turns it into 01, or virtual page 1, as desire d. We then use
this value as an index into the array of PTEs pointed to by the pag e table
base register.
Once this physical address is known, the hardware can fetch th e PTE
from memory , extract the PFN, and concatenate it with the offset from the
virtual address to form the desired physical address. Speciﬁc ally , you can
think of the PFN being left-shifted by SHIFT, and then bitwise OR’d with
the offset to form the ﬁnal address as follows:
offset = VirtualAddress & OFFSET_MASK
PhysAddr = (PFN << SHIFT) | offset
Finally , the hardware can fetch the desired data from memory and put
it into register eax. The program has now succeeded at loading a value
from memory!
To summarize, we now describe the initial protocol for what happen s
on each memory reference. Figure 18.6 (page 9) shows the approach . For
every memory reference (whether an instruction fetch or an expl icit load
or store), paging requires us to perform one extra memory referenc e in
order to ﬁrst fetch the translation from the page table. That is a lot of
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 9
1 // Extract the VPN from the virtual address
2 VPN = (VirtualAddress & VPN_MASK) >> SHIFT
3
4 // Form the address of the page-table entry (PTE)
5 PTEAddr = PTBR + (VPN * sizeof(PTE))
6
7 // Fetch the PTE
8 PTE = AccessMemory(PTEAddr)
9
10 // Check if process can access the page
11 if (PTE.Valid == False)
12 RaiseException(SEGMENTATION_FAULT)
13 else if (CanAccess(PTE.ProtectBits) == False)
14 RaiseException(PROTECTION_FAULT)
15 else
16 // Access OK: form physical address and fetch it
17 offset = VirtualAddress & OFFSET_MASK
18 PhysAddr = (PTE.PFN << PFN_SHIFT) | offset
19 Register = AccessMemory(PhysAddr)
Figure 18.6: Accessing Memory With Paging
work! Extra memory references are costly , and in this case will l ikely
slow down the process by a factor of two or more.
And now you can hopefully see that there are two real problems that
we must solve. Without careful design of both hardware and softwar e,
page tables will cause the system to run too slowly , as well as ta ke up
too much memory . While seemingly a great solution for our memory
virtualization needs, these two crucial problems must ﬁrst be overcome.
18.5 A Memory Trace
Before closing, we now trace through a simple memory access exam-
ple to demonstrate all of the resulting memory accesses that occu r when
using paging. The code snippet (in C, in a ﬁle called array.c) that we
are interested in is as follows:
int array[1000];
...
for (i = 0; i < 1000; i++)
array[i] = 0;
We compile array.c and run it with the following commands:
prompt> gcc -o array array.c -Wall -O
prompt> ./array
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

10 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
Of course, to truly understand what memory accesses this code sn ip-
pet (which simply initializes an array) will make, we’ll have to know (or
assume) a few more things. First, we’ll have to disassemble the result-
ing binary (using objdump on Linux, or otool on a Mac) to see what
assembly instructions are used to initialize the array in a loop . Here is the
resulting assembly code:
1024 movl $0x0,(%edi,%eax,4)
1028 incl %eax
1032 cmpl $0x03e8,%eax
1036 jne 1024
The code, if you know a little x86, is actually quite easy to understand2.
The ﬁrst instruction moves the value zero (shown as $0x0) into the vir-
tual memory address of the location of the array; this address is computed
by taking the contents of %edi and adding %eax multiplied by four to it.
Thus, %edi holds the base address of the array , whereas %eax holds the
array index (i); we multiply by four because the array is an array of inte-
gers, each of size four bytes.
The second instruction increments the array index held in %eax, and
the third instruction compares the contents of that register to t he hex
value 0x03e8, or decimal 1000. If the comparison shows that two val-
ues are not yet equal (which is what the jne instruction tests), the fourth
instruction jumps back to the top of the loop.
To understand which memory accesses this instruction sequence makes
(at both the virtual and physical levels), we’ll have to assume something
about where in virtual memory the code snippet and array are found , as
well as the contents and location of the page table.
For this example, we assume a virtual address space of size 64KB (un-
realistically small). We also assume a page size of 1KB.
All we need to know now are the contents of the page table, and its
location in physical memory . Let’s assume we have a linear (array-based)
page table and that it is located at physical address 1KB (1024 ).
As for its contents, there are just a few virtual pages we need to worry
about having mapped for this example. First, there is the virtu al page the
code lives on. Because the page size is 1KB, virtual address 102 4 resides
on the second page of the virtual address space (VPN=1, as VPN=0 i s
the ﬁrst page). Let’s assume this virtual page maps to physica l frame 4
(VPN 1 → PFN 4).
Next, there is the array itself. Its size is 4000 bytes (1000 i ntegers),
and we assume that it resides at virtual addresses 40000 throu gh 44000
(not including the last byte). The virtual pages for this decim al range are
VPN=39 ... VPN=42. Thus, we need mappings for these pages. Let ’s as-
sume these virtual-to-physical mappings for the example: (VPN 39 → PFN 7),
(VPN 40 → PFN 8), (VPN 41 → PFN 9), (VPN 42 → PFN 10).
2We are cheating a little bit here, assuming each instruction is four byt es in size for sim-
plicity; in actuality , x86 instructions are variable-sized.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 11
0 10 20 30 40 50
1024
1074
1124
Memory Access
Code (VA)
40000
40050
40100Array (VA)
1024
1074
1124
1174
1224
Page Table (PA)
4096
4146
4196
Code (PA)
7232
7282
7332
Array (PA)
mov
inc
cmp
jne
mov
PageTable[1]
PageTable[39]
Figure 18.7: A Virtual (And Physical) Memory T race
We are now ready to trace the memory references of the program.
When it runs, each instruction fetch will generate two memory references:
one to the page table to ﬁnd the physical frame that the instruction resides
within, and one to the instruction itself to fetch it to the CPU f or process-
ing. In addition, there is one explicit memory reference in the f orm of
the mov instruction; this adds another page table access ﬁrst (to tran slate
the array virtual address to the correct physical one) and then the array
access itself.
The entire process, for the ﬁrst ﬁve loop iterations, is depicted i n Fig-
ure 18.7 (page 11). The bottom most graph shows the instruction mem ory
references on the y-axis in black (with virtual addresses on th e left, and
the actual physical addresses on the right); the middle graph shows array
accesses in dark gray (again with virtual on left and physical on right); ﬁ-
nally , the topmost graph shows page table memory accesses in ligh t gray
(just physical, as the page table in this example resides in p hysical mem-
ory). The x-axis, for the entire trace, shows memory accesses acr oss the
ﬁrst ﬁve iterations of the loop; there are 10 memory accesses per loop ,
which includes four instruction fetches, one explicit update of memory ,
and ﬁve page table accesses to translate those four fetches and one explicit
update.
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

12 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
See if you can make sense of the patterns that show up in this visu-
alization. In particular, what will change as the loop continues to run
beyond these ﬁrst ﬁve iterations? Which new memory locations will be
accessed? Can you ﬁgure it out?
This has just been the simplest of examples (only a few lines of C code),
and yet you might already be able to sense the complexity of under stand-
ing the actual memory behavior of real applications. Don’t worry: it deﬁ-
nitely gets worse, because the mechanisms we are about to introduce only
complicate this already complex machinery . Sorry3!
18.6 Summary
We have introduced the concept of paging as a solution to our chal-
lenge of virtualizing memory . Paging has many advantages over p revi-
ous approaches (such as segmentation). First, it does not lead to e xternal
fragmentation, as paging (by design) divides memory into ﬁxed -sized
units. Second, it is quite ﬂexible, enabling the sparse use of vi rtual ad-
dress spaces.
However, implementing paging support without care will lead to a
slower machine (with many extra memory accesses to access the p age
table) as well as memory waste (with memory ﬁlled with page tabl es in-
stead of useful application data). We’ll thus have to think a lit tle harder
to come up with a paging system that not only works, but works well.
The next two chapters, fortunately , will show us how to do so.
3We’re not really sorry . But, we are sorry about not being sorry , if that makes sense.
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 13
References
[KE+62] “One-level Storage System” by T. Kilburn, D.B.G. Edwards , M.J. Lanigan, F.H. Sum-
ner. IRE Trans. EC-11, 2, 1962. Reprinted in Bell and Newell, “Comp uter Structures: Readings
and Examples”. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1971. The Atlas pioneered the idea of dividing memory
into ﬁxed-sized pages and in many senses was an early form of the memory-managem ent ideas we see
in modern computer systems.
[I09] “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manuals” Intel, 2009. Available:
http://www.intel.com/products/processor/manuals. In particular, pay attention to “Volume
3A: System Programming Guide Part 1” and “Volume 3B: System Programmin g Guide Part 2”.
[L78] “The Manchester Mark I and Atlas: A Historical Perspective” by S. H. L avington. Com-
munications of the ACM, V olume 21:1, January 1978. This paper is a great retrospective of some of
the history of the development of some important computer systems. As we someti mes forget in the US,
many of these new ideas came from overseas.
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES

14 P AGING : I NTRODUCTION
Homework (Simulation)
In this homework, you will use a simple program, which is known as
paging-linear-translate.py, to see if you understand how simple
virtual-to-physical address translation works with linear pa ge tables. See
the README for details.
Questions
1. Before doing any translations, let’s use the simulator to study how
linear page tables change size given different parameters. Compute
the size of linear page tables as different parameters change . Some
suggested inputs are below; by using the -v ﬂag, you can see how
many page-table entries are ﬁlled. First, to understand how l inear
page table size changes as the address space grows, run with th ese
ﬂags:
• -P 1k -a 1m -p 512m -v -n 0
• -P 1k -a 2m -p 512m -v -n 0
• -P 1k -a 4m -p 512m -v -n 0
2. Then, let’s understand how linear page table size changes as page
size grows. Before running any of these, try to think about the ex-
pected trends. How should page-table size change as the addres s
space grows? As the page size grows? Why not use big pages in
general?
• -P 1k -a 1m -p 512m -v -n 0
• -P 2k -a 1m -p 512m -v -n 0
• -P 4k -a 1m -p 512m -v -n 0
3. Now let’s do some translations. Start with some small examples,
and change the number of pages that are allocated to the address
space with the -u ﬂag. What happens as you increase the percent-
age of pages that are allocated in each address space?
• -P 1k -a 16k -p 32k -v -u 0
• -P 1k -a 16k -p 32k -v -u 25
• -P 1k -a 16k -p 32k -v -u 50
• -P 1k -a 16k -p 32k -v -u 75
• -P 1k -a 16k -p 32k -v -u 100
4. Now let’s try some different random seeds, and some different (a nd
sometimes quite crazy) address-space parameters, for variety . Which
of these parameter combinations are unrealistic? Why?
• -P 8 -a 32 -p 1024 -v -s 1
OPERATING
SYSTEMS
[V ERSION 1.10]
WWW.OSTEP .ORG

PAGING : I NTRODUCTION 15
• -P 8k -a 32k -p 1m -v -s 2
• -P 1m -a 256m -p 512m -v -s 3
5. Use the program to try out some other problems. Can you ﬁnd the
limits of where the program doesn’t work anymore? For example,
what happens if the address-space size is bigger than physical mem-
ory?
© 2008–25, A RPACI -D USSEAU THREE
EASY
PIECES